---
title:
  "Interiew Question: Build a Table Of Contents"
tags:
  - TypeScript
  - Interview Question
author: Sam Slotsky
date: 2023-09-09
---

Like many stories, this one starts with me bombing
a tech interview. Years ago I had a live coding
challenge with some company I don't remember now,
but I won't forget how anxious and embarrassed I
felt as I found myself unable to solve the
problem. The truth is that I often don't see the
right solution to basic algorithm problems right
away. It can really take time to marinate before I
have my "aha" moment!

Sometimes, I obsess for some number of days after
the interview and eventually solve the problem.
This is actually not one of those cases ðŸ˜‚ but I
ran into the problem again recently and figured it
out. Slowly. We're talking about an entire day of
my life. Maybe I'm not a great programmer but it
seems unfair that so many tech interviewers expect
us to solve things like this in just one hour.

Dear reader, please note that I did not have to
solve this problem. It was already solved for me
with a [plugin][rehype-toc]. But when I recognized
it as the same problem that I'd encountered in
that awful interview so long ago, I wanted to
solve it, mainly to prove that I could, but also
with an aim of sharing it here, because I take
great joy in being a spoiler for interviewers with
unfair expectations. If you ever find yourself
facing an interview question like this one, I hope
this post leaves you better prepared.

## The Challenge

In this problem, we're given an ordered list of
headings that we must convert to a tree that can
be used as a Table Of Contents (TOC) like the one
that appears on the right side of this page when
the screen is wide. For instance, say you have a
list of heading tags in the order that they appear
on a page.

```ts
const orderedHeadings = [
  "h1",
  "h2",
  "h2",
  "h3",
  "h4",
  "h2",
];
```

Given the above list, you want to transform it
into a TOC (Table Of Contents) with a structure
that looks more like this:

```ts
return [
  {
    tag: "h1",
    children: [
      {
        tag: "h2",
        children: [],
      },
      {
        tag: "h2",
        children: [
          {
            tag: "h3",
            children: [
              {
                tag: "h4",
                children: [],
              },
            ],
          },
        ],
      },
      {
        tag: "h2",
        children: [],
      },
    ],
  },
];
```

Maybe you're a much stronger programmer than I am
and you already recognize a fairly simple solution
to this. You might also recognize that, for
content authored using mdx, [there are already
plugins for that][rehype-toc]. But of course, that
would be cheating for this challenge. So, how do
we solve this by hand?

## Solution

My big developer brain often leads me to believe
that there's a recursive, immutable solution for
everything involving list transformations. And
maybe there is, but I didn't find one in this
case. I spent a _whole_ lot of time trying,
especially considering that I already _had_ a TOC
after integrating a [mdx plugin][rehype-toc]. So
when I got a loop-and-mutate solution working, I
called it a day.

What I eventually figured out is that for any
given heading in the list, it's easy to look
through the rest of the list and figure out what
its _parent_ should be, or if it shouldn't have a
parent at all. If you find a parent, then you can
add the node to the parent's children. That's...
basically it.

### Examples

Consider headings appearing on a page in this
order.

```plaintext
0 - h1
1 - h2
2 - h2
3 - h3
4 - h4
5 - h4
6 - h3
7 - h2
```

What is the parent node of item at index 7? It's
an `h2`, so we only need to look backwards through
the list until we find an `h1`, which happens to
be the first item in the list.

What about the parent of the item at index 5? It's
an `h4`, and a sibling to the `h4` located at
index 4. Both of these share the same `h3` parent
located at index 3.

The first item in the list has no parent. Of
course we know that an `h1` is a top level
heading, but what if we didn't have any `h1` tags
in our list?

```plaintext
0 - h2
1 - h2
2 - h3
```

If we examine the item at index 1, we have to
conclude that it's a top level heading, because
when we search backwards through the list, we
won't find an element with a lower heading number.
This example has two top level nodes, and the `h3`
at index 2 is a child of the `h2` at index 1.

### Find the parent

Now that the problem is more clear, let's write
code that will loop through and identify the
parent. Instead of an array of strings like `h1`,
and `h2`, we'll have objects with a `level`
property and the `text` that the heading displays.
We won't enforce proper heading semantics, e.g.
our code won't care if an `h5` comes after an
`h3`. We'll leave that up to the author of the
content.

```ts
interface ContentHeading {
  level: item.level;
  text: item.text;
}

export function structure(
  list: Array<ContentHeading>
) {
  // Loop backwards through the list
  for (let i = list.length - 1; i > -1; i--) {
    const item = list[i];
    let j = i - 1;
    let prev = list.at(j);
    let parent = null;

    // Start looking through the previous items. Keep going until
    // you find an item with a lower level than the current item.
    if (prev && item.level > prev.level) {
      parent = prev;
    } else {
      while (prev && item.level <= prev.level) {
        prev = list.at(--j);
      }

      if (prev) {
        parent = prev;
      }
    }
  }
}
```

This code will find the parent for each item, but
won't do anything with that information. Let's
finish this up by adding children to parents and
returning top level nodes.

### Restructuring the list

```ts {8-13, 33-37, 40}
interface StructuredHeading
  extends ContentHeading {
  children: Array<StructuredHeading>;
}

export function structure(
  unstructuredList: Array<ContentHeading>
): Array<StructuredHeading> {
  const items = [];
  const list: Array<StructuredHeading> =
    unstructuredList.map((item) => ({
      level: item.level,
      text: item.text,
      children: [],
    }));

  for (let i = list.length - 1; i > -1; i--) {
    const item = list[i];
    let j = i - 1;
    let prev = list.at(j);
    let parent = null;

    if (prev && item.level > prev.level) {
      parent = prev;
    } else {
      while (prev && item.level <= prev.level) {
        prev = list.at(--j);
      }

      if (prev) {
        parent = prev;
      }
    }

    if (parent) {
      parent.children.unshift(item);
    } else {
      items.unshift(item);
    }
  }

  return items;
}
```

And that's really it! We've restructured the list
just how we want it, so the next logical step is
to display it.

### Render the list

Now that we have a tree structure, recursive logic
feels a bit more obvious, especially if we're
using a component model to build our UI. Here's an
example using Qwik ðŸ‘‡

```tsx
export function RenderStructuredList(props: {
  list: Array<StructuredHeading>;
}) {
  if (props.list.length === 0) {
    return null;
  }

  return (
    <ol>
      {props.list.map((item, index) => {
        return (
          <li key={index}>
            {item.text}
            <RenderStructuredList
              list={item.children}
            />
          </li>
        );
      })}
    </ol>
  );
}
```

That's really all it takes: a nested loop and a
recursive component. You can see this all together
in [the main layout file for this
website][complete-example]. It seems simple in
hindsight, and I think that good solutions to
these problems usually _are_ simple in the sense
that they lack complexity. But that doesn't
necessarily mean they are easy to find!

## There's a plugin for that!

To be sure, the simplest way by far to add a TOC
to my blog posts was to use [the rehype-toc
plugin][rehype-toc]. If you haven't used [rehype
plugins][rehype-plugins], I strongly recommend
trying it. Any transformation that you might
imagine making to your mdx output is either
covered by an existing plugin or possible by
writing your own. This website uses [one such
custom plugin][clipboard-plugin] to add a
copy-to-clipboard button to the code snippets in
the blog posts.

The TOC plugin [exposes
options][rehype-toc-options] that allow you to
customize the output however you like. I had this
plugin integrated early on in the development of
my blog, but as I was reading through Qwik docs I
learned about [the `useContent`
hook][use-content-qwik], which returns the ordered
list of headings. It was then that I recognized
the same problem that I'd been challenged with at
an interview years prior. One advantage of using
the data provided by Qwik is the flexibility to
put the TOC anywhere I want on the page, and more
direct control over what actually gets rendered.

## Conclusion

I like writing about interview questions that I've
found challenging. I think it helps prepare me for
future interviews, and I hope it helps prepare
readers similarly. With any luck, you'll come
across a question like this in the future and
remember how to solve it. Here are some key
takeaways for me:

- Don't be afraid to just mutate stuff in a loop.
  You don't need to seek a recursive solution just
  because you suspect there is one. Find the most
  straightforward way to solve the problem, and
  maybe you'll find a way to generalize it into an
  elegant recursive expression later on (or maybe
  not, and that's ok).
- Start with the first thing you can deduce and
  build from there. In this case, realizing that
  you can identify any item's parent by moving
  backward through the list is key to solving the
  problem.
- Even if you've done this professionally for 14
  years and did pretty darn well back in school,
  you might not see correct solutions to simple
  algorithm problems right away. Try not fo feel
  bad about it.
- The rehype ecosystem is awesome and you should
  leverage it as much as possible. Don't be like
  me, please. Spare yourself. But also, no
  regrets.
- Loops are great, btw.

[complete-example]:
  https://github.com/sslotsky/saxymofo.dev/blob/b1c454ceb4e34ddf019e6efe1d09f091efe5477a/src/routes/layout.tsx#L14-L72
[rehype-toc]:
  https://github.com/JS-DevTools/rehype-toc
[rehype-plugins]:
  https://github.com/rehypejs/rehype/blob/main/doc/plugins.md#list-of-plugins
[clipboard-plugin]:
  https://github.com/sslotsky/saxymofo.dev/blob/b1c454ceb4e34ddf019e6efe1d09f091efe5477a/vite.config.ts#L22-L46
[rehype-toc-options]:
  https://github.com/JS-DevTools/rehype-toc#options
[use-content-qwik]:
  https://qwik.builder.io/docs/api/#usecontent
